Once around, Gong Gong.
So, this object discovered by the
telescope at the Paloma Observatory in
with around 40ear prediscovery period
going all the way back to images taken
in 1985,
giving us a fairly significant uh
tracking period between then and now. in
order to uh work out the parameters of
the orbit
named after a Chinese water god. The
Chinese water god responsible for chaos,
floods, and indeed the tilt of the
earth. So an astronomical connection
there as well,
located well off out into what's called
the scattered disc. So much further away
from the sun and in a somewhat
elliptical orbit of 554 years going
around the sun there. Um 34 to 101
astronomical units. So it's a 3:1 uh
ratio between its width and its uh
length.
Currently it's 88 astronomical units
away. So at an intermediate position and
the orbits also quite tilted. Uh the
name scattered disc really suggests uh
this parameter that the orbits are all
highly inclined further out whereas most
of the objects in the kiper belt in the
interior part seem to be more aligned
not perfectly but more aligned with the
plane of the solar system. Now, this one
is interacting with Neptune
gravitationally.
For every three orbits that Neptune
does, this one is doing exactly 10,
keeping that relationship stable and
with an odd pattern, and therefore the
interactions cancel out with each other
over time, stabilizing the orbit.
It's located at the moment in the
constellation of Aquarius in the
equatorial plane. That's the red line
going across the center there. Um, and
at a magnitude of 21.5. That's very
faint indeed. You need a very, very
powerful telescope to pin this one down.
You can see the little retrograde loops
that it carries out. as we keep
overtaking it once a year, it seems to
briefly move backwards um from our line
of sight to the distant stars as we go
around the sun. So that circular
movement uh the retrograde loops there
that's us and the general progression
across the sky that's uh going from 2000
up to the projection of 2050 that's its
movement carrying it in the more general
direction there
physically 1,230
km in diameter though that's quite a
sizable object bigger than many of the
Kipervelt objects that we've found the
fifth largest trans neptunian object. So
that's after uh Pluto and Eis and some
of the others.
Spinning slowly, 22 hours. That's quite
slow for these distant objects out in
the Trans Neptunian region.
Surface wise, it's dim, reflecting just
14% of the light. So
near black really a very dark color
indeed and very much the reddest object
found to date even redder than Pluto
suggesting that there are yet more of
these tholins and these seem to be a
product of being brewed up by cosmic
radiation
mixing water with the
carbon monoxide, methane and nitrogen to
create these red polymers which could
well be the seeds of life if only the
object wasn't in the deep freeze.
Water ice is present again suggesting
perhaps that there's been cryo volcanic
activity with the heat from the center
of this dwarf planet making its way out
to the surface. And just recently, James
Webb Space Telescope turned its BDI on
this one and revealed ethane and carbon
dioxide present as well. So, a rich soup
of chemicals all over the surface.
And it could well be that it is the
delivery of these sorts of organic soups
from their formation in the deep freeze
in these kovelt objects to earth uh in
very early times during the chaos of the
early solar system that has uh been the
seeds of life here on earth. Now Gong
has a planetary companion. It's got a
little moon called Zianglu.
the nine headed poisonous snake monster.
Excellent. And this is 100 kilometers in
diameter itself. So a decent sized moon
in fact. And with that we're able to see
that it's orbiting round in 25 days.
You've got this nice Hubble Space
Telescope image showing the moon going
around its orbit. And it's probably the
tidal forces from that moon that have
slowed down the rotation of Gong Gong to
the 22 hours that it is now doing. And
so we're finding that the vast majority
of these dwarf planets, these uh small
planettoids out there in the far reaches
of the solar system tend to have
companions and often rings. And it all
points to a collisional uh origin for
many of these systems, probably
accounting for a bit of internal warmth
as well. So that's once around Gong
Gong, and I leave you with this artist's
impression of it and its moon, Zianglu.
Thanks very much for listening.